Indian Institute Of Technology MadrasDepartment of Mechanical Engineering
KINEMATICS AND
DYNAMICS OF
MACHINERY
Adarsh UdayME21B005
Submitted by: Submitted to:
Dr. Manish Anandon 25th November 2022
COURSE PROJECT
PROJECT OVERVIEW
To introduce the mechanism used, it is a basic four-bar mechanism. The
bottom of the box, link CD, is the coupler in the aforementioned four-
bar mechanism.As mentioned in the problem statement, I have assumed an
appropriate scale in the units of the CAD softwares used.
1 cm = 1 unit
The initial iteration of the design for the mechanism was done on
AUTOCAD. I made the scaled workspace, and began with the initial
ideation.The initial ideation was of two-position synthesis considering the initial
and final positions of points C and D; finding their perpendicular
bisectors and locating some suitable center on these bisectors inside
the shaded region for the fixed pivots.The selected pivot points are marked as O2 and O4. O4 is joined to O2; and is link number 1. O2 is joined to C; and is link number 2. C is joined to D; and is link number 3.D is joined to O4; and is link number 4. Therefore, it is a four-bar mechanism, with link 1 grounded, and link 3
as the coupler.
MECHANISM ANALYSIS
Grashof Analysis 
Longest link length = 194.48cm = LShortest link length = 49.71cm = SIntermiediate link lengths: 163.91 = P, 91cm = QClearly, S + L < P + QTherefore, this mechanism follows Grashof's law, and is thus a
Grashof mechanism.Since the shortest link is grounded, this Grashof mechanism is a
Double Crank mechanism.Link 1 is grounded.Links 2 and 4 are both "Cranks".Link 3, the coupler, "tumbles" due to the motion of the two cranks. Here is a video showing the motion of a generalised Double Crank
mechanism. It is quite evident that the coupler rotates 360° about
its own center of rotation. 
Tranmission Angles
The transmission angle is the angle between the coupler and the
output link. Transmission angle at initial extreme position is 145°Transmission angle at final extreme position is 67°
IDEATION AND CONSTRUCTION
I began with the initial idea of two-position synthesis considering the
initial and final positions of points C and D on the box.Then, I joined the initial and final points of C (C and C' respectively),
and also joined the initial and final points of D (D and D' respectively).I constructed perpendicular bisectors to each of the lines CC' and DD',
and then considered one point on each bisector that lies in the fixed
region.The point on the bisector of CC' is O2 and the point on the bisector of
DD' is O4.O2 and O4 are now the fixed pivots for the four-bar mechanism.
AUTOCAD construction diagram
DELIVERABLES
The motion of the proposed four-bar mechanism does not interfere
with the smooth operation of the truck. The motion of the container is smooth as the mechanism operates from
extreme to extreme. The proposed mechanism is formulated with all given constraints taken
into consideration, and is entirely contained inside the given
workspace. The links are all rigid, the joints are all of single degree of freedom
(revolute pin joints)Recommendations for large-scale production:Using a better connecter between couplers of both mechanisms
that sits the box on itself well, and releases the box at the end.Possibly using washers instead of screws, such that the ends of
these joints that stick out do not interfere with the other links, and
such that these joints allow fully free rotation of cranks & coupler.Fixing the two ground positions slightly better. I feel the ground
position I have chosen is tedious to demonstrate, and is also
probably not feasible for large scale produce. 
Initial
position
Final
position
MODEL
Model AnimationO2O4CDO2O4CD
Physical Model
Initial position
The box sits on the a support
fixed between both couplers. Therefore, the base of the box,
which is on this support, performs
the exact same motion as the
couplers themself do.The base of the box is horizontal
in the initial position.
Final position
Crudely speaking, the box
performs a 270° rotation. Both of
the couplers are vertical in the
final position. The base of the box is also
vertical, hence satisfying the
problem statement.
Videos of the working model
I have attached all model videos, designs and animations of the proposed
mechanism in this Google Drive link.I have also submitted the videos of the physical model, PDF of the
proposed design, animation of the design and this report directly to Google
Classroom. The link is open to any IITM email ID.Drive Link : 
https://drive.google.com/drive/u/1/folders/1EXkkG-qxQuxO_YuUHnMDE21oDi_NtH11
